So now that we know how to add events or how to listen to events and how to remove event listeners
which can also be quite handy,
let's have a look at that event object which is generated automatically, by the browser in this case
and passed into our event handler and which in general though, even if you're not working in the browser
is a core idea behind event driven code.
Whatever causes an event typically also provides you some data along with such an event to describe it,
to give you some extra metadata or to give you methods to control how the event behaves thereafter,
important for some more complex events for example.
So therefore here on the button click handler, instead of just showing an alert,
let's accept the argument.
You can name this argument however you want, often it's named event or ev or just e because it is describing
the event we're getting but since it's your function, you can name this whoever you want of course
and then here I want to console log that event object,
it will be an object so that we can look into it.
So now when we click our button, this will be logged. For now by the way, I will also change this back
here to directly point at the button click handler down there.
So if we save that and we then reload and click on this button, we see we get a mouse event here and
we see it has a bunch of properties and it actually also has a bunch of methods which we just don't see
here when it's output like this.
Now we have a bunch of properties which in the end describe the event.
This for example tells us if the alt key was pressed whilst we clicked
and that can be interesting for building certain user interfaces where you maybe want to do something
else
if the alt key was pressed while the user clicked somewhere versus when it was not clicked,
you'll have similar properties for the control key for example. We see which button was pressed, zero
is the left button, if I right click this by the way, nothing happens because I haven't registered this,
only a left click works and you will have to reload to click again because we still remove this here,
right?
So back to the event here
then, we see which button was used, left button.
We then also have client(x) and client(y) and that would be the exact coordinates of where my pointer was,
so the mouse cursor was when I clicked.
You can see if I reload and I click again somewhere else,
these are different coordinates than before and so on.
Now in general, check out the MDN documentation to get detailed explanations of all properties and
what they do
and of course also simply play around with that to learn more. As you see, for a
mouse event, you get various coordinates, here
these are the general coordinates inside of the window, here for example we would have the coordinates
inside of the button itself.
So if I reload and click on the top left for example,
you see that would be pretty small because coordinate system starts on the top left and I clicked very
close on the top left and therefore I get these very small coordinates.
Now if we scroll down further, we see one very important property and that's the target property.
Every event has this and this describes which target, which element in the end caused this event,
so where, in this case where you clicked on. So target in this case gives us access to the button DOM
element and this can be super useful of course because if you have a scenario where you want to
interact with the DOM element on which you clicked, well then it's super convenient to have this target
property which in the end gives you direct access to this element, here's an example. If we go back to
events.html and we duplicate this button here real quick, click me too
and we then alter our events.js file to register listeners in all these buttons and maybe not remove
it anymore, so that
here we don't select just a button but we use query selector all to select all buttons,
so I rename this now and then down here, we can't use button add event listener anymore because we don't
have a single button anymore but instead, we can go to buttons and then use ForEach to get access to
each button we selected in this anonymous function I pass to ForEach and then in here, we can add
our event listeners and register click events on the button click handler and now as you see if
you reload, you can click either of the buttons to trigger that event.
Now let's say we want to disable the button on which we clicked, well then it would be pretty hard to
do this without knowing on which button exactly we clicked, we would probably have to create two different
methods or functions which we assign as listeners, which would be pretty cumbersome.
Well with event target, we can just say event.target.disabled equals true, buttons have a disabled
property which you can set to true to disable them.
Now let's also console log the event object still however
so that we also get some output that proves that we click this and
let's then reload
and as you see if I click this now, I get this output but if I click it a second time, I don't get it
because actually, the button was disabled.
Now I haven't set up styles that would reflect this but if we inspect this element here, we also see it
has the disabled attribute
and if you click on the other button, you see that button gets this attribute as well.
So this is very useful, event target gives us direct access to the direct element we clicked on.